>> I AM ABOUT TO SIGN INTO LAW
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.
MY FELLOW CITIZENS, WE HAVE COME
NOW TO A TIME OF TESTING.
WE MUST NOT FAIL.
>> Ifill: NEARLY 50 YEARS AFTER
THAT WATERSHED MOMENT IN
AMERICA'S STRUGGLE AGAINST
DISCRIMINATION, CIVIL RIGHTS
LEADERS AND FOUR OF THE
LIVING PRESIDENTS GATHERED IN
AUSTIN, TEXAS, TO COMMEMORATE
THE LANDMARK LEGISLATION.
>> BECAUSE OF THE CIVIL
RIGMOVEMENT, BECAUSE OF
THE LAWS PRESIDENT JOHNSON
SIGNED, NEW DOORS OF
OPPORTUNITY AND EDUCATION
SWUNG OPEN FOR EVERYBODY.
>> Ifill: GOOD EVENING.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
TONIGHT, GWEN LEADS AN EXTENDED
ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSION ON THE
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT-- HOW FAR THE
COUNTRY HAS COME, AND HOW FAR IT
HAS TO GO.
>> IT'S REALLY HARD TO TALK
TO THAT TODAY TO YOUNG
PEOPLE BECAUSE THEY CAN'T
IMAGINE PLACES IN ATLANTA
YOU COULDN'T GO, OR SHOP OR
TRY ON CLOTHES.
>> MANY CHILDREN IN OUR
COUNTRY STILL GROW UP TODAY
AND MAYBE COLLEGE OR THEIR
FIRST JOB IS THE FIRST TIME
THAT INTERACT WITH PEOPLE OF
ANOTHER RACE.
>> Ifill: ALSO AHEAD THIS
THURSDAY, TWO TAKES ON
EDUCATION.
HARI SREENIVASAN PROFILES ONE
NEW YORK CITY HIGH SCHOOL
PUTTING ITS KIDS ON THE FAST
TRACK TO A COLLEGE DEGREE FOR
FREE.
>> I CAN MAKE SOMETHING OUT OF
MYSELF WITH THIS DEGREE SO THAT
I'M NOT ANOTHER STEREOTYPE, THAT
ALL WOMEN COOK AND THEY DON'T
BUILD, AND THEY DON'T WIRE AND
THEY DON'T PROGRAM.
>> Woodruff: AND A GLOBAL
PERSPECTIVE FROM THE FORMER U.K.
PRIME MINISTER, GORDON BROWN, ON
THE CHALLENGE OF EXPANDING
CHILDREN'S ACCESS TO EDUCATION.
>> Ifill: THOSE ARE JUST
SOME OF THE STORIES WE'RE
COVERING ON TONIGHT'S PBS
NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: A WAVE OF SELLING
HIT WALL STREET TODAY.
TECHNOLOGY AND BIOTECH STOCKS
WERE ESPECIALLY HARD HIT.
THE NASDAQ FELL MORE THAN
129 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 4,054,
ITS WORST DAY SINCE NOVEMBER,
2011.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST NEARLY 267 POINTS TO CLOSE
AT 16,170.
AND THE S&P 500 WAS DOWN 39 AT
1,833.
THE DROP CAME DESPITE A REPORT
THAT NEW CLAIMS FOR JOBLESS
BENEFITS ARE NOW THE LOWEST
IN NEARLY SEVEN YEARS.
A FEDERAL JUDGE IN NEW YORK HAS
SENTENCED S.A.C. CAPITAL IN A
MAJOR INSIDER TRADING CASE.
THE HEDGE FUND WILL PAY A RECORD
FINE AS PART OF A PLEA DEAL
TOTALING $1.8 BILLION.
EIGHT S.A.C. EMPLOYEES HAVE
ALREADY BEEN CONVICTED OF
INSIDER TRADING, BUT FOUNDER AND
OWNER STEVEN COHEN HAS NOT BEEN
CHARGED.
INVESTIGATORS IN MURRYSVILLE,
PENNSYLVANIA, TRIED TODAY TO
UNDERSTAND WHY A TEENAGER
STABBED 21 PEOPLE AT HIS
HIGH SCHOOL.
16 YEAR OLD ALEX HRIBAL WAS
TACKLED AND ARRESTED AFTER
YESTERDAY'S ATTACK.
HE FACES MULTIPLE COUNTS OF
ATTEMPTED MURDER AND
AGGRAVATED ASSAULT.
TODAY, ONE OF THE VICTIMS, BRETT
HURT, TOLD OF BEING KNIFED IN
THE BACK AS HE WALKED WITH A
FRIEND.
>> THERE WERE SO MANY PEOPLE IN
THE HALLWAYS, AND SOMEONE SAID
THEY SAW BLOOD OR SOMETHING.
EVERYONE JUST STARTED SCREAMING,
BUT WHEN I GOT HIT EVERYONE
NOTICED AND STARTED RUNNING IN
DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS.
GRACIE WAS SCREAMING AND ASKING
ME IF I WAS ALL RIGHT, AND WAS
TRYING TO KEEP PRESSURE ON MY
BACK AND TAKE ME INTO A SAFE
ROOM.
>> Woodruff: THE DEFENSE LAWYER
FOR ALEX HRIBAL SAYS HE HAD NO
HISTORY OF MENTAL ILLNESS AND
THAT THE ATTACK SEEMED TO COME
OUT OF NOWHERE.
THREE OF THE WOUNDED REMAIN IN
CRITICAL CONDITION.
SEARCHERS LOOKING FOR THE
MISSING MALAYSIAN AIRLINER ARE
NOW ANALYZING A POSSIBLE FIFTH
UNDERWATER PING.
THE AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE
DETECTED THE SOUND TODAY USING
SONAR BUOYS IN A SECTION OF THE
INDIAN OCEAN THAT'S ABOUT THE
SIZE OF LOS ANGELES.
IN PERTH, AUSTRALIA, THE HEAD OF
THE SEARCH EFFORT SAID THEY'RE
LISTENING FOR MORE PINGS BEFORE
SENDING DOWN A ROBOTIC VEHICLE.
>> BEAR IN MIND THAT THE TIME
SPENT ON THE SURFACE WE'RE
COVERING SIX TIMES MORE AREA IN
ANY GIVEN TIME THAN WE'LL BE
ABLE TO DO WHEN WE GO
UNDERWATER.
SO, WITH THE BATTERIES LIKELY TO
FADE OR FAIL VERY SHORTLY, WE
NEED TO GET AS MUCH POSITIONAL
DATA AS WE CAN SO THAT WE CAN
DEFINE A VERY SMALL SEARCH AREA.
>> Woodruff: THE HUNT FOR DEBRIS
ON THE SURFACE HAS ALREADY
NARROWED TO JUST OVER 22,000
SQUARE MILES.
THAT'S ABOUT A QUARTER OF THE
PREVIOUS SEARCH AREA.
THE UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL IS READY TO SEND CLOSE
TO 12,000 PEACEKEEPERS TO THE
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC.
TODAY'S COUNCIL VOTE MEANS THE
U.N. FORCE WILL TAKE OVER FROM
5,000 AFRICAN UNION TROOPS IN
SEPTEMBER.
THE MISSION IS TO QUELL VIOLENCE
BETWEEN CHRISTIANS AND MUSLIMS
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
NATO WARNED RUSSIA TODAY TO PULL
BACK ITS 40,000 TROOPS ALONG THE
BORDER WITH UKRAINE.
SECRETARY-GENERAL ANDERS FOCH
RASMUSSEN SPOKE IN PRAGUE AND
SAID ANY FURTHER RUSSIAN
INTERVENTION COULD HAVE GRAVE
CONSEQUENCES.
>> YOU HAVE A CHOICE TO STOP
BLAMING OTHERS FOR YOUR OWN
ACTIONS; TO STOP MASSING
YOUR TROOPS; TO STOP ES CA
LIGHTSING THIS CRISIS AND
START ENGAGING IN A GENUINE
DIALOGUE.
>> Woodruff: RASMUSSEN ALSO SAID
NATO IS CONSIDERING ITS OWN
DEPLOYMENTS WITHIN EASTERN
EUROPE.
RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTER SERGEI
LAVROV SHOT BACK THAT EVEN
TALKING OF DEPLOYING TROOPS NEAR
RUSSIA IS A VIOLATION OF
EXISTING AGREEMENTS.
MEANWHILE, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN ISSUED HIS OWN
WARNING OVER NATURAL GAS.
HE SAID UKRAINE MUST START
PAYING IN ADVANCE OR DELIVERIES
MAY BE HALTED.
IN WASHINGTON, THERE'S WORD THAT
ENROLLMENT UNDER THE NEW HEALTH
CARE LAW HAS NOW HIT 7.5
MILLION.
THE ANNOUNCEMENT TODAY IS AN
INCREASE FROM 7.1 MILLION LAST
WEEK.
OPEN ENROLLMENT OFFICIALLY ENDED
MARCH 31, BUT MANY PEOPLE WERE
GIVEN EXTRA TIME.
HOUSE REPUBLICANS HAVE PUSHED
THROUGH A NON-BINDING BUDGET
THAT PROMISES TO WIPE OUT
DEFICITS IN TEN YEARS.
BUDGET COMMITTEE CHAIR PAUL RYAN
WROTE THE PLAN, INCLUDING LARGE
CUTS IN HEALTH PROGRAMS, FOOD
STAMPS AND GRANTS FOR COLLEGE
STUDENT
>> WE ARE OFFERING A BALANCED
BUDGET THAT PAYS DOWN THE DEBT.
WE ARE OFFERING PATIENT-CENTERED
SOLUTIONS.
( APPLAUSE )
WE ARE OFFERING PATIENT-CENTERED
SOLUTIONS SO PATIENTS ARE THE
NUCLEUS OF THE HEALTHCARE
SYSTEM, NOT THE GOVERNMENT.
WE'RE OFFERING A PLAN TO SAVE
MEDICARE NOW AND FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS.
>> Woodruff: DEMOCRATS DECRIED
THE BILL, LED BY MINORITY LEADER
NANCY PELOSI AT HER WEEKLY
BRIEFING.
A CONSERVATIVE TALK-SHOW HOST ON
COMEDY CENTRAL'S "THE COLBERT
REPORT" SINCE 2005.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR,
COMMEMORATING THE CIVIL RIGHTS
ACT 50 YEARS ON AND OUR
ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSION ON THE
STRUGGLE AGAINST DISCRIMINATION.
ALSO: THE GLOBAL PUSH TO GET ALL
CHILDREN EDUCATED; ONE NEW YORK
HIGH SCHOOL PUTTING STUDENTS ON
THE FAST TRACK TO A COLLEGE
DEGREE; AND THE DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE SLAMS ALBUQUERQUE'S
POLICE FOR USING EXCESSIVE
E.
>> Ifill: NOW, A KEY MOMENT IN
THE FIGHT FOR EQUALITY THAT
STILL RESONATES HALF A CENTURY
LATER.
>> LET US LAY ASIDE IRRELEVANT
DIFFERENCES AND MAKE OUR NATION
WHOLE.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT LYNDON
JOHNSON, SPEAKING AS HE SIGNED
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964
INTO LAW.
THE LANDMARK LEGISLATION
OUTLAWED DISCRIMINATION BASED ON
RACE, ETHNICITY AND SEX.
TODAY, AT THE L.B.J.
PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY IN AUSTIN,
TEXAS, GEORGIA CONGRESSMAN JOHN
LEWIS, ONE OF THE SURVIVING
HEROES OF THAT ERA SAID, "THE
PRESIDENTIAL PEN-STROKES ON THAT
JULY DAY, NEARLY 50 YEARS AGO,
CHANGED EVERYTHING."
>> WITHOUT THE LEADERSHIP OF
PRESIDENT LYNDON JOHNSON AND
INVOLVEMENT OF HUNDREDS AND
THOUSANDS AND MILLIONS OF PEOPLE
IN THIS CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT,
THERE WOULD BE NO PRESIDENT
JIMMY CARTER, NO PRESIDENT BILL
CLINTON, NO PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA.
LYNDON JOHNSON USING HIS SKILLS
AND HIS POWER MADE THIS
POSSIBLE.
WHEN PEOPLE SAY NOTHING HAD
CHANGED, I SAY COME AND WALK IN
MY SHOES AND I WILL SHOW YOU
CHANGE.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Ifill: JUST GETTING THE BILL
PASSED WAS A MOMENTOUS STRUGGLE.
PRESIDENT JOHN F. KENNEDY
PROPOSED IT THE SUMMER BEFORE
HIS ASSASSINATION.
IT DID NOT BECOME LAW UNTIL THE
FOLLOWING YEAR, IN 1964, WHEN
JOHNSON AND A BIPARTISAN GROUP
OF LAWMAKERS OVERCAME WHAT
TURNED INTO A TWO-MONTH SENATE
FILIBUSTER LED BY SOUTHERN
DEMOCRATS.
IN THE DECADES SINCE, THAT PART
OF HIS LEGACY HAS OFTEN BEEN
OVERSHADOWED BY THE VIETNAM WAR,
BUT THIS WEEK'S ANNIVERSARY
SUMMIT AT THE JOHNSON LIBRARY
SOUGHT TO CHANGE THAT.
>> I HAVE LIVED OUT THE PROMISE
OF L.B.J.'s EFFORTS.
>> Ifill: IN HIS KEYNOTE ADDRESS
TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA'S REMARKS
TURNED PERSONAL.
>> BECAUSE OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS
MOVEMENT, BECAUSE OF THE LAWS
PRESIDENT JOHNSON SIGNED, NEW
DOORS OF OPPORTUNITY AND
EDUCATION SWUNG OPEN FOR
EVERYBODY.
THEY SWUNG OPEN FOR YOU AND THEY
SWUNG OPEN FOR ME.
( APPLAUSE )
THAT'S WHY I'M STANDING HERE
TODAY, BECAUSE OF THOSE EFFORTS,
BECAUSE OF THAT LEGACY.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Ifill: MR. OBAMA WAS ONE OF
FOUR LIVING PRESIDENTS TO
ADDRESS THE THREE-DAY SUMMIT AND
PRAISE THE TEXAS DEMOCRAT WHO
FOUGHT HIS OWN PARTY.
>> HE KNEW THAT HE HAD A UNIQUE
CAPACITY, AS THE MOST POWERFUL
WHITE POLITICIAN FROM THE SOUTH,
TO NOT MERELY CHALLENGE THE
CONVENTION THAT HAD CRUSHED THE
DREAMS OF SO MANY, BUT TO
ULTIMATELY DISMANTLE FOR GOOD
THE STRUCTURES OF LEGAL
SEGREGATION.
HE'S THE ONLY GUY WHO COULD DO
AND HE KNEW THERE'D BE A COST,
FAMOUSLY SAYING THE DEMOCRATIC
PARTY MAY HAVE LOST THE SOUTH
FOR A GENERATION.
>> Ifill: THE PRESIDENT WAS NOT
THE ONLY ONE TO CAUTION THAT
CHALLENGES REMAIN.
FORMER PRESIDENT JIMMY CARTER
SPOKE TUESDAY.
>> WE KIND OF ACCEPT SELF
CONGRATULATIONS ABOUT THE
WONDERFUL 50th ANNIVERSARY,
WHICH IS WONDERFUL, BUT WE FEEL
LIKE, YOU KNOW, LYNDON JOHNSON
DID IT AND WE DON'T HAVE TO DO
ANYTHING ANYMORE.
>> Ifill: FORMER PRESIDENT BILL
CLINTON TOOK ON VOTING RIGHTS,
CRITICIZING LAST YEAR'S SUPREME
COURT DECISION THAT ALLOWED
STATES TO IMPOSE NEW
RESTRICTIONS WITHOUT FEDERAL
APPROVAL.
>> AND ALL OF A SUDDEN THERE ARE
ALL THESE NEW BARRIERS TO VOTING
TO MAKE IT HARDER TO VOTE.
IS THIS WHAT MARTIN LUTHER KING
GAVE HIS LIFE FOR?
IS THIS WHAT LYNDON JOHNSON
EMPLOYED HIS LEGENDARY SKILLS
FOR?
>> Ifill: FORMER PRESIDENT
GEORGE W. BUSH, ADDRESSING THE
CROWD THIS EVENING, IS THE
SUMMIT'S FINAL SPEAKER.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, I TRAVELED TO
THE SITE OF THE SUMMIT FOR THIS
CONVERSATION.
WE ARE JOINED NOW AT KLRU
STUDIOS IN AUSTIN, TEXAS, BY
FOUR GUESTS WHO BRING DIFFERENT
PERSPECTIVES TO THE UPCOMING
ANNIVERSARY.
>> Woodruff: SHIRLEY
FRANKLIN FORMER TWO TERM
MAYOR OF ATLANTA WAS THE
FIRST AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMAN
TO BE ELECTED MAYOR OF A
MAJOR SOUTHERN CITY.
SHE IS THE BARBARA JORDAN
VISITING PROFESSOR OF ETHICS
AND POLITICAL VALUES AT THE
LBJ SCHOOL OF PUBLIC AFFAIRS.
ROBERT KIMBALL IS THE FORMER
LEGISLATIVE AIDE TO
REPUBLICAN CONGRESSMAN JOHN
LINDSAY OF NEW YORK, AS
DIRECTOR OF THE REPUBLICAN
LEGISLATIVE RESEARCH
ASSOCIATION, HE SERVED AS
THE CHIEF AID TE TO THE
HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADERS IN
THE LEADUP TO THE PASSAGE OF
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT.>> AND DIRL
RIGHTS CLINIC AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS SCHOOL
OF LAW, AND LINDA BIRD
JOHNSON ROB IS THE DAUGHTER
OF PRESIDENT LYNDON JOHNSON
ANBO DIRECTOR OF THE
LBJ FOUNDATION.
WELCOME TO YOU ALL.
LYNDON JOHNSON ROB, WAS THE
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT, YOUR
FATHER'S MOST SIGNIFICANT
ACHIEVEMENT AS PRESIDENT?
>> WELL, I WOULD HAVE TO SAY
ALL OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS
ACTS.
BECAUSE THERE WERE THREE AN
EVEN SAY THE IMMIGRATION ACT
WHICH I THINK ALSO IS THE
CIVIL RIGHTS ACT, MAYBE ON A
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVE.
THAT HE CARED VERY, VERY
MUCH ABOUT IT.
HE WANTED TO EMANCIPATE THE
WHITES AS MUCH AS PEOPLE OF
COLOR.
BECAUSE HE KNEW HOW,
PARTICULARLY IN THE SOUTH
BUT NOT ONLY IN THE SOUTH,
WE WERE SO RESTRICTED AND HE
WANTED EVERYBODY TO LIVE UP
TO THE BEST THAT GOD GAVE
THEM.
AND USE THOSE TOOLS OF
EDUCATION AND HAVE GOOD
HEALTH CARE, TO BE ABLE TO
DO THE THINGS, TO MAKE
AMERICA GREAT.
>> Ifill: I KNOW YEARS LATER
HERE IN AUSTIN ONE OF THE
CONCERNS OF THE LBJ LIBRARY
IS TO TRY TO REORDER
PEOPLE'S MEMORIES OF YOUR
FATHER'S TERM IN OFFICE.
AND DO YOU WONDER THAT
VIETNAM IN MANY WAYS
OVERSHADOWED THAT?
>> NO QUESTION ABOUT IT.
HE HATED THE WAR.
HE HATED HAVING ANYBODY PUT
IN HARM AWAY.
BUT HE BELIEVED THAT WHAT WE
WERE DOING IS WHAT WE HAD TO
DO FOR OUR COMMITMENTS WITH
CTO, FOR MANY REASONS.
AND HE WAS CARRYING FORTH A
POLICY THAT HE HAD
INHERITED.
AND HE TRIED AND GOT US TO
THE PEACE TABLE IN 1968.
AND THEN AS YOU KNOW, THE
SOUTH VIETNAMESE WERE TOLD
THAT THEY COULD GET A BETTER
DEAL UNDER RICHARD NIXON AND
THEY LEFT THE PEA TABLE.
>> Ifill: SO MUCH DRAMA
INVOLVING VIETNAM, SO MUCH
DRAMA INVOLVING THE CIVIL
RIGHTS ACT, ROBERT KIMBALL,
YOU WERE 28 YEARS OLD, AN
AIDE TO JOHN LINDSAY.
AT THE PEOPLE DON'T REMEMBER
THAT WHAT HAPPENED IN THE
HOUSE REPUBLICAN CAUCUS
DETERMINED THE OUTCOME OF
THIS ACT IN MANY WAYS.
>> THE REPUBLICANS PLAYED A
CRUCIAL ROLE AND IT'S HARD
TO BELIEVE TODAY.
BUT THERE WERE POSITIVE,
THEY WORKED VERY CLOSELY
WITH THE ADMINISTRATION AND
WE PARTICIPATED IN THE
NEGOTIATIONS THAT LEAD TO
THE COMPROMISE THREE WEEKS
BEFORE KENNEDY'S DEATH.
>> Ifill: WHAT'S INTERESTING
TO ME IS THAT IN SOME WAYS
THE PEOPLE WHO DROVE THIS
ACT, A SOUTHERN PRESIDENT,
AND REPUBLICANS IN THE HOUSE
AND ULTIMATELY THE SENATE,
WROTE THIS AND IT IS
COUNTERINFEWIVE TO THE
POLITICS WE UNDERSTAND NOW.
>> YES, IT'S VERY --
>> HOW DID IT HAPPEN.
>> FIRST OF ALL THERE WERE
MANY MORE MODERATE AND
LIBERAL REPUBLICANS BACK
THEN.
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY STILL
WAS SPLIT.
YOU HAD THE SOUTHERN GROUP
WHO WAS GOING TO VOTE
AGAINST THE BILL.
AND PEOPLE WHO WOULD SUPPORT
IT.
WE NEEDED A COALITION
BETWEEN BOTH PARTIES.
WE ALL KNEW THAT AND WE KNEW
ALSO THAT IT HAD TO BE A
MASSIVE COALITION AND NOT
JUST A ONE VOTE VICTORY.
SO WE STROVE FOR THAT AND IT
WAS PASSED THROUGH THE HOUSE
AT 290 TO 130 WHICH IS A BIG
MARGIN AND THAT WAS VERY
IMPORTANT FOR THE FUTURE OF
IT.
>> AND IN THE SENATE THOSE
WERE THE DAYS WHEN A
FILIBUSTER WAS A REAL
FILIBUSTER.
>> IT WAS A ROLE FILIBUSTER.
>> HOW LONG DID THAT GO ON?
>> SEVERAL MONTHS.
AND FINALLY PASSAGE.
SO I WANT TO ASK SHIRLEY
FRANKLIN, AT THAT PERIOD OF
TIME, YOU WERE OBVIOUSLY
JUST A GLEAN, BUT ENOUGH TO
BE AWARE OF WHO THE SUNG AND
UNSUNG HEROES WERE AT THAT
PERIOD OF TIME THEN IN A
SENSE.
>> WELL, I WENT TO COLLEGE
IN '63.
AND I WAS IN WASHINGTON D.C.
AT HOWARD UNIVERSITY.
SO I WAS VERY MUCH AWARE OF
WHAT WAS GOING ON IN TERMS
OF THE DEBATE.
THERE WERE STUDENTS WHO WERE
ORGANIZING ACROSS THE SOUTH,
WHOOT AND BLACK STUDENTS.
AND SOME OF MYLASSMATES
WERE ACTUALLY SOME OF THE
ORGANIZERS.
I WAS CURIOUS BUT NOT BRAVE
ENOUGH TO JOIN.
AND REALLY DIDN'T HAVE ANY
IDEA HOW FAST THE CHANGES
WOULD COME TO AMERICA FROM
THAT PERIOD.
BUT WAS REALLY PROUD OF THE
COUNTRY AND THE PRESIDENT
FOR STEPPING UP.
>> THERE IS SO MUCH
CONVERSATION AS WE LOOK BACK
ABOUT THE HEROIC MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS AND PEOPLE IN THE
WHITE HOUSE.
BUT THERE WERE A LOT, YOU
MENTIONED SNIC, CIVIL RIGHTS
ORGANIZATION, THEY WERE
ALMOST TO THE SIDE LYNNS IN
SOME WAY IN THIS DISCUSSION.
>> WELL, THEY MAY HAVE BEEN
ON THE SIDELINES IN A WAY.
BUT THEY WERE VERY MUCH
ACTIVE IN THE STREETS.
THE EDMOND-- BRIDGE, THE
MARCH FROM SELMA TO
MONTGOMERIE.
I RECENTLY WENT TO THE 49th
BRIDGE CROSSING AND IT'S
JUST AS INSPIRATIONAL TODAY,
NOT NEARLY AS DANGEROUS AS
IT WAS IN THE 60s.
BUT THERE WAS A LOT OF
ACTIVITY IN THE STREETS AND
CHURCHES.
IT WAS NOT UNUSUAL FOR THE
MINISTER IN MY CHURCH TO
TALK ABOUT THE CIVIL RIGHTS
MOVEMENT AS PART OF HIS
SERMON.
AND FOR THERE TO BE DINNER
TABLE CONVERSATION ABOUT IT.
SO I WOULD SAY THAT MOST OF
US WHO WERE YOUNG PEOPLE
WERE INCLUDED BECAUSE WE
WERE INCLUDED IN THE
SO-CALLED ADULT
CONVERSATIONS AT ONE LEVEL.
AND THEN IN COLLEGE AND IN
HIGH SCHOOL THERE WAS LOTS
AND LOTS OF DISCUSSION.
>> AND IN A PLACE SUCH AS
ATLANTA, CHANGING PUBLIC
ACCOMMODATION LAWS HAD AN
IMMEDIATE IMPACT.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AND MY GENERATION OF YOUNG
PEOPLE IN THE SOUTH GREW UP
IN THE SEGREGATED SOUTH.
SOMETHING THAT I DIDN'T
EXPERIENCE, BUT EVERYONE
ALMOST 70, BETWEEN '60s AND
'70s HAD THAT DIRECT
EXPERIENCE AND IT'S REALLY
HARD TO TALK ABOUT THAT
TODAY TO YOUNG PEOPLE
BECAUSE THEY CAN'T IMAGINE
THERE WERE PLACES HAD IN
ATLANTA YOU COULDN'T GO.
OR SHOP OR TRY ON CLOTHES
OVER COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES.
I TALK ABOUT THAT AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AS WELL.
BARBARA JORDAN WAS NOT ABLE
TO COME TO UNIVERSITY OF
TEXAS AT THAT POINT.
AND SO THERE IS A HUGE
CHANGE IN AMERICAN CULTURE,
AS WELL AS IN THE LAW.
>> THERE IS AN IMMEDIATE
EFFECT OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS
ACT AND THEN AN EVENTUAL
AFFECT.
HOW WOULD YOU MEASURE THOSE
TWO.
>> I THINK THE CIVIL RIGHTS
AGO WAS A TREMENDOUS
ACVETS DID WAS DISMANTLE
THE RACIAL HIERARCHY THAT
CRIST EXISTED THROUGH
SLAVERY, THROUGH JIM CROW IT
IS NOT UNDOUBTEDLY ONE OF
THE-- BUT ONE OF MOST
CONSTITUTIONAL MOMENTS OF
OUR NATION'S HISTORY BECAUSE
IT MADE THE 14th AMENDMENT
WHOLE AGAIN T MADE IT
VIBRANT.
IN TERMS OF ITS EVENTUAL
LEGACY, I THINK OF COURSE IN
ADDITION TO ELIMINATING
RACIAL HIERARCHY T SET THE
STAGE FOR A TRULY INTEGRATED
SOCIETY.
AND THERE IS OBVIOUSLY
PROGRESS THAT WE HAVE MADE
AND A LOT OF PROGRESS THAT
WE STILL HAVE LEFT TO MAKE
ON THAT FRONT SO WE FIND
THAT THERE ARE RACIAL
DISPARITIES, ACTIVE DISPARTS
STILL IN MANY AREAS OF LIFE.
AND MANY CHILDREN IN OUR
COUNTRY STILL GROW UP TODAY
AND MAYBE COLLEGE OR THEIR
FIRST JOB IS THE FIRST TIME
THAT THEY INTERACT WITH
PEOPLE OF ANOTHER RACE.
AND SO WITH RESPECT TO
INTEGRATION, WE STILL HAVE A
LONG WAY TO GO.
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, LYNDON
JOHNSON ROB SAYING THIS WAS
NOT ONLY A CIVIL RIGHTS BILK,
BUT THERE WERE A SERIES OF
THEM.
DO YOU THINK THAT THEN WHAT
HAPPENED WAS WE BEGAN TO SEE
FALLOUT ON GENDER EQUALITY
AND SOCIAL EQUALITY AND GAY
EQUALITY, ALL OF THAT AS A
RESULT?
>> THAT'S ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT WAS THE
BY NEAR LEGISLATION AND WHAT
FOLLOWED AFTERWARD
EVERYTHING DOWN FROM AGE
DISCRIMINATION, GENDER
DISCRIMINATION, DISABILITY
DISCRIMINATION AND IT REALLY
ENDED ALL OF THOSE SORT OF
FORMAL CATEGORIES OF
DISCRIMINATION,
SUBORDINATION AND HIERARCHY.
I THINK THAT IF YOU TAKE ALL
OF THAT LEGISLATION TOGETHER,
IT REALLY OPENED UP THE
AMERICAN DREAM TO MOST
AMERICANS IN A WAY THAT HAD
NOT BEEN BEFORE.
>> WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED IN 1964, HOW MUCH
OF THIS WAS DRIVEN, ROBERT
KIMBALL BY INSIDERS AND HOW
MUCH OF THIS WAS DRIVEN BY
AGITATION FROM OUTSIDERS, OR
PUBLIC OPINION.
>> IT WAS BOTH.
THE CIVIL RIGHTS GROUP HAD A
LEADERSHIP CONFERENCE AND
MANY ORGANIZATIONS INCLUDING
CHURCH GROUPS.
AND THEY WERE ALL VERY
ACTIVE.
AND THEY WERE CONSTANTLY, ON
THE HILL, TALKING TO US.
THE KEY EVENT, OF COURSE NOT
SO WELL REMEMBERED AS OTHERS
WAS THE CHURCH BOMBING ON
SEPTEMBER 15th.
THE CONSCIENCE OF THE
COUNTRY WAS AROUSED.
PEOPLE WERE HORRIFIED.
AND THAT CLEARLY WAS THE
EVENT THAT LEAD TO THE
PASSAGE OF THE BILL, MORE
THAN ANY OTHER.
THE MARCH WAS VERY
IMPORTANT.
BUT IT WAS MORE SYMBOLIC.
IT WAS SO PEACEFUL AND SO
IMPRESSIVE BUT IT WAS THE
CHURCH BOMBING THAT
FRIGHTENED AMERICA, AND LEAD
TO WHAT HAPPENED WHICH WAS
VERY IMPORTANT.
>> AND IT ALSO SEEMS, THE
ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT
KENNEDY WAS ALSO, THE BILL
WAS MOVING ALONG AND IT WAS
MAKING ITS WAY THROUGH THE
HOUSE.
BUT WHEN THE PRESIDENT WAS
ASSASSINATED AND YOUR FATHER
BECAME PRESIDENT THE VERY
FIRST THING HE SAID WHEN HE
WENT TO THE ROLE OF THE
HOUSE WAS WE HAVE TO PASS
THIS NOWS.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I THINK HE SHAMED A LOT OF
PEOPLE INTO VOTING FOR IT.
>> INCLUDING SOUTHERN
DEMOCRATS.
>> WELL, YOU FOUND PEOPLE
WHO WERE NOT IN FAVOR OF IT
WHO WERE NOT JUST IN THE
SOUTH.
AND THAT'S WHY HE HAD TO
WORK SO HARD ON DIRKSON THAT
WE ALL NEEDED TO DO THIS, NO
MATTER WHERE WE LIVED,
WHETHER WE WERE IN PEORIA OR
WHETHER WE WERE IN
MONTGOMERIE THAT THIS WAS
SOMETHING THAT WOULD HELP
FULFILL THAT AMERICAN DREAM.
AND THAT IT WAS REALLY
HOLDING US ALL BACK, NOT
JUST PEOPLE OF COLOR BUT ALL
OF US.
AND PART OF IT IS SHAMING.
YOU KNOW, HOW COULD WE CALL
OURSELVES THIS GREAT COUNTRY
AND WE ARE STILL THESE
LITTLE BLACK-- LITTLE BLACK
GIRLS ARE BEING KILLED WHILE
THEY'RE GOING TO CHURCH.
AND SHAME, SHAME.
>> SHIRLEY FRANKLIN,
PROGRAMS YOU WOULDN'T HAVE
BEEN MAYOR OF ATLANTA
WITHOUT THE PASSAGE OF THIS
AND OTHER VOTING RIGHTS ACTS,
OTHER ACTS ALONG THE WAY.
BUT THERE WAS A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN PASSING A LAW LIKE
THIS AND GETTING IT ENFORCED.
DO YOU FEEL LIKE THAT THE
U.S. POLICY, THAT THE
GOVERNMENT FOLLOW-THROUGH ON
THE PROMISE OF THAT
OUTREACH --
>> IT TOOK AWHILE AND
CERTAINLY IT TOOK A LOT OF
ENERGY ON THE PART OF PEOPLE
ON THE GROUND AS WELL AS
LEADERS.
OVER THE YEARS, WE'VE SEEN
THE EXPLOSION OF POLITICAL
FIGURES FROM ALL WALKS OF
LIFE.
SOME HAVE OPENED THE DOOR
FOR PEOPLE FROM ALL
BACKGROUNDS, WHETHER GAY,
LESBIAN, PEOPLE FROM LIMITED
MEANS.
THERE WAS A SENSE WHEN I WAS
GROWING UP THAT YOU HAD TO
BE FROM A CERTAIN SIDE OF
THE TRACKS IN ORDER TO BE AN
ELECTED OFFICIAL.
YOU HAD TO BE LUCKY TO BE A
BE ELECTEDICIAL.
AND WITH THE PASSAGE OF THIS,
AND THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT
AND ALL OF THAT ENTAILED,
ALL OF A SUDDEN A CHILDLIKE
ME COULD NOT BE MAYOR OF
ATLANTA WHEN I WAS BORN,
WHEN I GRADUATED FROM HIGH
SCHOOL, WHEN I GRADUATED
FROM COLLEGE, BUT SOME YEARS
LATER I HAD THE OPPORTUNITY.
BECAUSE OF THE LEGISLATIVE
INITIATIVES BUT ALSO BECAUSE
OF THE SHIFT IN THE CULTURAL,
FORMS IN THE CULTURAL
TRADITION.
>> I JUST WANT TO YOU BRING
THIS TO TODAY.
WHAT IS LEFT UNDONE?
>> THERE'S A LOT TO BE DONE
STILL IT SO THERE ARE STILL
SOME FORMAL CATEGORIES SUCH
AS YOU MENTIONED EARLIER
LGBT INDIVIDUALS AND
FAMILIES AND FORMAL
DISCRIMINATION.
AND OBVIOUSLY WE'VE SEEN
THAT CAMPAIGN FOR GREATER
EQUALITY AND FREEDOM UNFOLD
OVER OT LAST 20, 30 YEARS.
AND IT'S RAPIDLY PROGRESSING.
BUT BEYOND THAT, THERE ARE
STILL MAIN PROBLEMS WITH
RESPECT TO RACIAL EQUALITY
IN TERMS OF ACCESS TO PUBLIC
GOODS AND PUBLIC BENEFITS.
AND SO, FOR EXAMPLE, WHETHER
IT COMES TO HOUSING K
THROUGH 12 EDUCATION, ACCESS
TO COLLEGE, WE SEE THAT
THERE ARE RACIALDISPARITIES.
FOR WHITE FAMILIES THEY CAN
GET INTO BETTER RENTAL
HOUSING AND INTO THE HOUSING
SALE MARKET EASIER THAN
ASIAN FAMILIES,
AFRICAN-AMERICAN FAMILIES,
LATINO FAMILIES.
WITH RESPECT TO
AFRICAN-AMERICAN CHILDREN
AND LATINO CHILDREN IN OUR
PUBLIC SCHOOLS, THEY HAVE
FEWER OPPORTUNITIES FOR
COLLEGE READINESS AND FOR
COLLEGE PREP EDUCATION.
THEN DO THEIR WHITE
COUNTERPARTS.
AND WHAT WE SEE IS EVEN WHEN
WE HAVE ELIMINATED INTENSEAL
FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION,
THESE RACIAL AND ETHNIC
DISPARTS PERSIST.
SO HOW DO WE GET AT THEM AND
HOW DO WE CONSTRUCT POLICY
TO REALLY INSURANCE
ENEQUALITY FOR EVERYONE,
THAT'S THE CHALLENGE.
>> SAY THERE IS A
12-YEAR-OLD HERE AT THE
TABLE WHO HAS GROWN-UP IN A
TIME IN WHICH NONE OF THIS
SEEMED TO BE PROBLEM FOR
THEM.
HOW DO YOU BEGIN TO EXPLAIN
TO SOMEONE OF THAT AGE WHO
GREW UP IN, WITH THE
BENEFITS OF CIVIL RIGHTS
LEGISLATION AND PROTECTION
THAT THIS IS STILL IMPORTANT
TODAY, SHIRLEY FRANKLIN?
>> WELL, I HAVE A
14-YEAR-OLD GRANDSON WHO I
HAVE HAD TO EXPLAIN THAT TO.
THERE WAS A LOT OF
DISCUSSION ABOUT THEIR
RIGHTS IN THE
LEGISLATURE AND IT WAS
IMPORTANT FOR ME TO EXPLAIN
THAT NOT TOO LONG AGO THE
INTEGRATED SCHOOL THAT HE
WAS IN WAS NOT POSSIBLE,
THAT HE WOULD NOT HAVE HAD
WHITE AND LATINO AND ASIAN
FRIENDS.
AND THAT, IN FACT, HE COULD
HAVE BEEN AT RISK OF HIS OWN
LIFE IF HE HAD FOUGHT
OUT-- IS OUT OUT FRIENDS.
AND IN A MATTER OF A FEW
MINUTES HE GOT THE MESSAGE
BECAUSE HE IS ACCUSTOMED TO
HAVING FRIENDSHIPS AND
RELATIONSHIPS ACROSS
CULTURAL AND RACIAL AND
ETHNIC BACKGROUNDS.
>> I THINK EDUCATION IS VERY
IMPORTANT AS SHIRLEY
MENTIONED.
I WAS AT A WOMEN'S HISTORY
PRESENTATION AT MY SON'S
PRESCHOOL AND WE HAVE TO
START EARLY AND KEEP
EDUCATING ABOUT THE CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
I'M A BENEFICIARY OF THE
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT.
SO FOR ME IT'S A PROCESS OF
EDUCATING MYSELF.
THERE IS A LOT OF GOOD
RESEARCH OUT THERE THAT
SHOWS IT THAT ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE NEED TO DO AS
A SOCIETY IS CONFRONT OUR
IMPLICIT BUYASES.
WE ALL WORK WITH STEREOTYPES
IN OUR HEAD NO MATTER HOW
HARD WE TRY TO RID OURSELVES
OF THEM SO THERE IS WORK WE
NEED TO DO INDIVIDUALLY AS
FAMILIES, AS COMMUNITITES TO
THINK ABOUT HOW WE WORK WITH
AND HOW WE LIVE WITH AN
INTERACT WITH PEOPLE AS
OTHER CULTURALS AND OTHER
BACKGROUNDS.
>> I THINK WE CAN ALL SAY
THAT EVERYONE AT THIS TABLE
AND PROBABLY EVERYONE WE'RE
ALL BENEFICIARIES OF THAT
CIVIL RIGHTS AGO.
THANK YOU ALL.
>> THANK YOU.
>> FOR PARTICIPATING IN OUR
CONVERSATION.
SHIRLEY FRANKLIN, ROBERT
KIMBALL, AND LINDA JOHNSON
ROB.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU, THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, A PAIR OF
EDUCATION STORIES-- ONE ABOUT
TOO FEW CHILDREN ATTENDING
SCHOOL INTERNATIONALLY, THE
OTHER ON A PROMISING PILOT HIGH
SCHOOL IN THE U.S.
LET'S START WITH A MAJOR GLOBAL
PROBLEM, ESPECIALLY PRONOUNCED
IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
THERE ARE MORE THAN 200 MILLION
CHILDREN WHO SHOULD BE ATTENDING
SCHOOL BUT SIMPLY DO NOT BECAUSE
OF A VARIETY OF BARRIERS.
THAT PROBLEM IS AT THE CENTER OF
A NEW U.N. INITIATIVE TO GET 57
MILLION MORE CHILDREN IN SCHOOL
BY THE END OF 2015.
FORMER BRITISH PRIME MINISTER
GORDON BROWN IS SPEARHEADING
THAT EFFORT AS A SPECIAL ENVOY
FOR SPECIAL EDUCATION.
I MET UP WITH HIM EARLIER IN
WASHINGTON TODAY BEFORE HE SPOKE
AT THE WORLD BANK TO MAKE HIS
CASE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS AT STAKE IN
THIS INITIATIVE YOU'RE NOW
DEEPLY INVOLVED IN?
>> I THINK IT'S THE FUTURE OF A
WHOLE GENERATION OF YOUNG
PEOPLE.
IF WE CANNOT PROVIDE TODAY'S
YOUNG PEOPLE IN ASIA AND AFRICA
WITH THE OPPORTUNITY OF
EDUCATION AND THEN THE CHANCE OF
EMPLOYMENT AND STARTING A
BUSINESS OR WHATEVER, WE ARE
GOING TO HAVE THE MOST
DISCONTENTED YOUTH.
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A
GENERATIONAL PROBLEM BECAUSE
THEY KNOW THE OPPORTUNITIES THAT
PEOPLE HAVE IN OTHER COUNTRIES,
THEY CAN LEARN ABOUT IT THROUGH
THE INTERNET AND THROUGH MOBILE
PHONES, AND THEY'RE AWARE THAT
THE INEQUALITY OF OPPORTUNITY
THAT THEY FACE IS UNFAIR.
AND I THINK WE'VE SEEN THE
MAKINGS OF A CIVIL RIGHTS
STRUGGLE IN THE YOUNG PEOPLE TO
GET EDUCATION, TO STOP CHILD
MARRIAGE, TO STOP CHILD LABOR,
CHILD TRAFFICKING AND SEX
DISCRIMINATION AGAINST GIRLS.
AND IF YOU DON'T DO SOMETHING
ABOUT IT, THERE'S A WHOLE SORT
OF WELTER OF DISCONTENT THAT IS
BUILDING UP IN POPULATIONS OF
ASIA AND AFRICA.
>> Woodruff: THE NUMBERS ARE
ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO COMPREHEND.
I THINK IT'S 250 MILLION
CHILDREN NOT GETTING A PRIMARY
EDUCATION, AND THEN YOU'RE
TRYING TO PUT DOWN A NUMBER, 57
MILLION YOU WOULD LIKE TO GET
INTO SCHOOL.
HOW DO YOU-- HOW DO YOU REDUCE
THAT TO SOMETHING YOU CAN
ACTUALLY MAKE A DIFFERENCE?
>> WELL, 57 MILLION CHILDREN ARE
THE NUMBERS OF CHILDREN THAT ARE
NOT GOING TO GO TO SCHOOL TODAY
OR ANY OTHER DAY.
SOME OF THEM ARE IN CHILD LABOR.
IS SOME OF THEM ARE IN
CHILD LABOR, SOME OF THEM
ARE-- SOME OF THEM ARE
SIMPLY NOT SCHOOLS TO GO TO.
SOME OF THEM ARE GIRLS WHO
THE TALIBAN IS PREVENTING
FROM GOING TO SCHOOL.
BUT IT IS RELATIVELY
INEXPENSIVE TO PAY FOR THE
EDUCATION FOR THE YOUNG
CHILD.
SO $6 BILLION IF WE COULD
FIND THE EXTRA FUNDS NEXT
YEAR WE COULD GET ALMOST ALL
OF THESE CHILDREN TO SCHOOL.
AND THERE IS NO TECHNICAL OR
SCIENTIFIC BREAKTHROUGH THAT'S
NEEDED TO DO THIS.
WE KNOW WHAT IT IS WE'VE GOT TO
DO.
WE'VE GOT TO GET TEACHERS, AND
ALSO BUILDINGS, AND HAVE THE
EDUCATIONAL EQUIPMENT.
AND, OF COURSE, WE WANT TO
INCREASE THE QUALITY OF
EDUCATION VERY QUICKLY, BUT AT
THE MOMENT WE'VE SET A GOAL THAT
BY THE END OF DECEMBER 2015,
EVERY CHILD SHOULD BE AT SCHOOL.
THAT'S THE MILLENNIUM
DEVELOPMENT GOAL.
EVERYBODY'S PROMISED THIS AND WE
COULD DELIVER IT IF WE COULD
PROVIDE THESE EXTRA RESOURCES.
SO IT IS BOTH MANAGEABLE, AND
IT'S ALSO IN MY VIEW NECESSARY.
IF YOU MAKE A PROMISE, YOU
SHOULD TRY TO REDEEM IT.
>> Woodruff: BUT EVEN BEFORE YOU
TALK ABOUT THE MONEY, THERE ARE
THE CULTURAL, THE INGRAINED
PRACTICES IN COUNTRIES WHERE
CHILD MARRIAGE, FOR EXAMPLE, IS
CONSIDERED-- A YOUNG GIRLS
MARRIED OFF AT A VERY YOUNG AGE,
OTHER COUNTRIES OR PLACES WHERE
FAMILIES SEE CHILDREN AS AN
ECONOMIC NECESSITY TO HAVE THEM
WORKING OUT IN FIELDS OR DOING
WHATEVER THEY'RE DOING TO BRING
MONEY IN FOR THE FAMILY.
HOW DO YOU CHANGE ALL THAT?
>> AND YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY RIGHT.
THERE ARE TEN MILLION CHILDREN
WHO ARE MARRIED OFF BEFORE THE
AGE OF 14 OR 15.
CHILDREN WHO ARE WORKING
FULL-TIME AT THE MOMENT AN
THEY'RE UNDER 14.
BUT I SEE GREAT CHANGE IN
THE ATTITUDE OF YOUNG
PEOPLE.
I'VE JUST BEEN IN PAKISTAN.
A YEAR AND A HALF AGO I WENT
AFTER THE YOUNG GIRL WHO WAS
SHOP AND I FOUND THE
POPULATION THAT WAS TIRED,
THAT WAS WORRIED THAT WAS
ANXIOUS, THAT WAS FEARFUL OF
THE TALIBAN.
AND THEN I WENT BACK A FEW DAYS
AGO, AND I FOUND GIRLS IN
PAKISTAN, 12, 13, 14, 15,
DETERMINED TO FIGHT FOR THEIR
EDUCATION.
AND THEY NO LONGER WANT PAKISTAN
TO BE SEEN BY THE REST OF THE
WORLD AS A COUNTRY THAT IS
FAILING TO GET GIRLS TO SCHOOL,
THEY WANT TO BE KNOWN BY THEIR
SUCCESSES.
GIRLS GETTING INTO SCHOOL AND
GETTING QUALIFICATIONS.
SO GIRLS THEMSELVES ARE FIGHTING
FOR THEIR CIVIL RIGHTS.
THIS IS A HUGE CHANGE FROM A FEW
YEARS AGO.
AND ONCE THIS CHANGE HAPPENS,
YOU CAN'T... YOU CAN'T HOLD IT
BACK, BECAUSE THESE ARE GIRLS
WHO ARE AWARE OF THEIR RIGHTS,
AWARE THAT YOU CAN STAND UP
AGAINST THE PATRIARCHS WHO TRY
TO MARRY THEM OFF, AWARE THAT
THERE IS DISCRIMINATION BEING
PRACTICED BY THE TALIBAN, AND
THEY'RE TAKING IT ON.
AND THERE ARE MANY, MANY
HUNDREDS OF COURAGEOUS GIRLS IN
PAKISTAN WHO ARE SAYING, "WE
DEMAND OUR RIGHT TO BE EDUCATED
NOW."
THAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN IN THE
REST OF WORLD, TOO.
>> Woodruff: BUT OVER A LONG
PERIOD OF TIME.
>> BUT THE CHANGES IN THE LAST
YEAR-AND-A-HALF HAVE BEEN, IN MY
VIEW, VERY BIG INDEED.
BUT NOW YOU'VE GOT GIRLS
AGITATING FOR EDUCATION.
YOU'VE GOT CHILD MARRIAGE
BEING CREATED BY GIRLS
THEMSELVES WHERE THEY ARE
SAYING WE THE GIRLS WILL
REFUSE TO MARRY EVEN IF OUR
FATHERS TELL US WE'RE GO TO
BE SOLD INTO MARRIAGE 'S
GOING TO REFUSE.
AND THESE MOVEMENTS OF
OPINION, HAVE PROTESTS IN
INDIA, THE BIG ANTI-CHILD
LABOR CAMPAIGNS THAT HAVE
BEEN MOUNTED BY YOUNG PEOPLE
THEMSELVES, SOMETHING IN
CHANGING AROUND THE WORLD
AND WE ARE TOO SLOW TO REACT
TO THAT AND TO HELP THESE
CHILDREN WITH THE RESOURCES
TO GET THEM INTO EDUCATION.
>> YOU MENTION
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONED $6
BILLION, YOU SAID RELATIVELY A
SMALL AMOUNT OF MONEY.
BUT HOW DO YOU GET GOVERNMENTS
THAT WE SEE HAVE BEEN REDUCING
THE AMOUNTS THEY'VE BEEN
SPENDING ON EDUCATION?
HOW DO YOU GET THEM TO
UNDERSTAND IT'S A PRIORITY?
AND I'M TALKING NOW ABOUT THE
RECIPIENT COUNTRIES.
>> YEAH, I THINK, FIRST OF ALL,
THE GOVERNMENTS OF PAKISTAN,
NIGERIA, AFGHANISTAN HAVE GOT TO
DO MORE THEMSELVES, BECAUSE
NOBODY IS GOING TO JUST THROW
MONEY AT A COUNTRY THAT'S NOT
PREPARED TO TAKE ACTION ITSELF.
SO I'M TRYING TO PERSUADE THEM.
TO PERSUADE AND I THINK
WE'VE BEEN SUCCESSFUL IN
PERSUADING PAKISTAN AND
NIGER THAT THAT THEY HAVE TO
SPEND MORE THEMSELVES, THEN
WE CAN INCENTIVIZE THEM
SPENDING MORE BY SAYING IF
YOU DO THIS, WE WILL DO MORE
TO HIP.
AND I THINK WHAT PEOPLE ARE
LOOKING FOR IS RESULTS IN
DEVELOPMENTS.
AND IF WE CAN SHOW THAT WE
CAN GET RESULTS, CHILDRENED
INVOLVED, TEACHERS ACTUALLY
TURNING UP, THE QUALITY OF
THE CURRICULUM, RESULTS IN
TERMS OF QUALIFICATION, I
THINK THE WORLD WILL BE
PREPARED TO MAKE THE
NECESSARY AMOUNTS OF MONEY
TO MAKE THIS HAPPEN IT IS
ACTUALLY INCREDIBLY SMALL IN
RELATIONS TO THE OVERALL
AMOUNT.
>> BUT WHEN YOU LOOK AT WHAT
DONOR COUNTRIES HAVE BEEN
SPENDING, THOUGH, THEY CUT
BACK THE AMOUNT THEY SPEND.
>> THERE ARE NEW DONORS
COMING INTO THE FIELD.
SO QATAR, UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES, SAUDI ARABIA,
THERE ARE MANY DONORS.
CHINA IS STARTING TO DONATE,
MANY INTO EDUCATION FOR THE
FIRST TIME.
KOREA IS COMING IN.
SO YES, I WOULD LIKE AMERICA
TO DO MORE AND I WOULD LIKE
THE REST OF THE WEST TO DO
MORE BUT THERE ARE MANY
POTENTIAL DONORS IN THE
FUTURE.
AND THEY BEGIN TO SEE THAT
IF YOU BACK A COUNTRY THAT
IS EDUCATING ITS CHILDREN,
YOU'VE GOT A SKILLED
WORKFORCE AS WELL AS HAVING
MET THE MORAL REQUIREMENTS
THAT EVERY CHILD SHOULD HAVE
OPPORTUNITIES.
>> Woodruff: HOW MUCH DOES THIS
DEPEND ON THE PERSUASIVE POWERS
OF SOMEONE WHO'S INTERNATIONALLY
KNOWN, LIKE, IF YOU ARE GORDON
BROWN AND HOW MUCH-- AND YOU
ARE-- THE FORCE OF YOUR
PERSONALITY?
>> WELL, I WISH I COULD BE MORE
SUCCESSFUL.
BUT THE TRUTH IS THAT I KNOW
FROM BEING A LEADER IN RECENT
YEARS, THAT IF THERE IS NOT
PUBLIC PRESSURE, AND IF THERE IS
NOT A DEMAND FROM THE REST OF
THE WORLD, THEN THERE ARE OTHER
PRIORITIES THAT YOU'RE GOING TO
ADDRESS.
WE'VE GOT TO PERSUADE THESE
LEADERS, THERE IS NO COUNTRY IN
THE POORER PARTS OF THE WORLD
WILL EVER BE A RICH COUNTRY,
WILL EVER BE A HIGH-INCOME
COUNTRY IF IT DOESN'T INVEST IN
EDUCATION.
AND I THINK WE ARE GETTING THAT
ARGUMENT ACROSS TO THE LEADERS.
ON ONE HAND, YOU'VE GOT THIS
GREAT CIVIL RIGHTS STRUGGLE THAT
IS NOW STARTING, IN MY VIEW.
ON THE OTHER HAND, YOU'VE GOT A
RECOGNITION THAT NO MATTER WHAT
ELSE YOU'VE GOT TO DO AS A
COUNTRY, YOU'VE GOT TO INVEST IN
EDUCATION IF YOU'RE GOING TO BE
A SUCCESSFUL ECONOMY.
AND I CAN PERSUADE THEM THAT
EIR ECONOMIC POLICY.ELEMENT OF
>> Woodruff: YOU BELIEVE THEY
ARE FEELING THIS KIND OF
PRESSURE AND FEELING THEIR
CONSEQUENCES IF THEY DON'T MAKE
THESE CHANGES?
CAN WE WILL BE PRESSING
GOVERNMENTS AROUND THE
WORLD.
WE'VE GOT HUNDREDS OF YOT
AMBASSADORS APPOINTED TO PUT
PRESSURE ON GOVERNMENT.
WE'VE GOT WHAT IS CALLED
YOUTH-- QUITE RAD RAL THESE
ARE YOUNG PEOPLE AGREEING
THAT ON A PARTICULAR DAY
THEY WILL BE BT
PARLIAMENTARIANS AND THEY
WILL SPEAK OUT FOR THE CASE
OF EDUCATION, WE HAVE
NATIONAL PETITIONS IN
INDIVIDUAL COUNTRIES SO THE
PRESSURE IS BUILDING.
IT'S NOT THERE STRONG ENOUGH
YET BUT IT WILL BECOME VERY
STRONG OVER OT NEXT FEW
MONTHS.
AND THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY
TO HELP COUNTRIES DEVELOP
THEIR EDUCATIONAL
OPPORTUNITIES FOR CHILDREN
IN A WAY THAT THEY HAVE NOT
DONE BEFORE, BUT IT'S ALSO
AN OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO
SHOW THAT DEVELOPMENT AID
CAN BE INCREDIBLY EFFECTIVE.
>> Woodruff: GORDON BROWN, THE
U.N., UNITED NATIONS SPECIAL
ENVOY FOR GLOBAL EDUCATION.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
THAT CONVERSATION DISCUSSES
ON-LINE WHEN WE DISCUSS
MOVES TO GET SYRIAN CHILDREN
DISPLACED BY THE CIVIL WAR
INTO SCHOOL.
AND ON OUR WORLD PAGE WE
SPOKE TO TWO YOUNG GIRLS WHO
WERE SITTING BESIDE MALALA
WHEN TALIBAN GUNMAN ATTACKED
THEIR SCHOOL BUS ABOUT THEIR
FIGHT FOR ACCESS TO
EDUCATION FOR ALL BOYS AND
GIRLS.
>> Ifill: OUR SECOND EDUCATION
STORY IS ABOUT A BROOKLYN HIGH
SCHOOL THAT HAS NOT YET
GRADUATED ITS FIRST CLASS, BUT
IT'S BEING CLOSELY WATCHED FOR
ITS APPROACH TO PROVIDING LOWER-
INCOME STUDENTS WITH COLLEGE
TUITION AND THE SPECIAL SKILLS
TO GET A JOB.
ONE OF ITS DISTINCT FEATURES: A
LOT MORE TIME IN THE CLASSROOM.
PRESIDENT OBAMA SANG ITS PRAISES
AGAIN THIS WEEK AND ANNOUNCED
TWO MORE SCHOOLS LIKE IT WILL BE
OPENED.
HARI SREENIVASAN HAS THE STORY
AS PART OF OUR "AMERICAN
GRADUATE" PROJECT, A PUBLIC
MEDIA INITIATIVE FUNDED BY THE
CORPORATION FOR PUBLIC
BROADCASTING.
>>> WHEN IT COMES TO HIGH
SCHOOL SHOULD SIXIERS BE THE
NEW FOUR T IS A QUESTION
THAT CLITIS HAS TIMES TO
THINK ABOUT EVERY DAY AS HE
RIDES NEW YORK CITY SUBWAY
FROM HIS HOME IN THE
GRONTION BRONCS TO A SCHOOL
IN BROOKLYN, A JOURNEY THAT
TAKES HIM AN HOUR AND A HALF
EACHY.
HE IS A JUNIOR AT PATHWAYS
IN TECHNOLOGY EARLY COLLEGE
HIGH SCHOOL, OR P-TECH.
P-TECH IS A SIX-YEAR PUBLIC
SCHOOL WHERE STUDENTS LIKE
CLITIS ARE EXPECTED TO LEAVE
WITH A HIGH SCHOOL DEPLOM AT
AND TWO YEAR ASSOCIATIVE
APPLIED SCIENCE DEGREE FINCK
COMMUNITY COLLEGE FOR FREE.
>> IT MEANS WE START WHAT I
WANT TO DO MY FUTURE, WHERE
I WANT TO AGAINST.
>> SIERRA COPELAND ALSO A
JUN CRER SAYS SHE WAS READY
TO BE CHALLENGED AND HAVING
THE OPPORTUNITY TO TAKE
COLLEGE COURSES AS EARLY AS
THE 10th GRADE WAS THE PUSH
SHE NEEDED.
>> I CAME TO P-TECH, THEY
GAVE ME NOT A PUSH BUT A
SHOVE AND THEY SHOVED ME
INTO IT.
AND IT'S BENEFICIAL TO ME.
I FEEL LIKE FOR ME IT'S BEEN
A LEARNING EXPERIENCE.
IT HAS HELPED ME TO GROW UP
FASTER.
IT TAUGHT ME TO PRIORITIZE.
>> Srennivasan: GETTING
STUDENTS FROM LOW INCOME
FAMILIES THE CHANCE AT FREE
COLLEGE TUITION WAS THE
BRAINCHILD OF A PUBLIC
PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP
DEVELOPED BY IBM, THE NEW
YORK CITY EDUCATION
DEPARTMENT AND THE CITY
UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK.
THE JOB OPPORTUNITIES FOR
THE 21st CENTURY REQUIRE A
LEVEL OF SKILL THAT IS FAR
BEYOND A SIMPLE HIGH SCHOOL
DIPLOMA.
>> Srennivasan: IBM STANLEY
LITTOUT A FORMER DEPUTY
SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR FOR NEW
YORK CITY HELPED STARTS
BROOKLYN'S P-TECH IN 2001
AND SINCE EVERSAW THE
CREATION OF SIMILAR SCHOOLS
IN NEW YORK AN CHICAGO.
STUDENTS HAVE LONGER SCHOOL
DAYS A TEND CLASSES
YEAR-ROUND AND GET HANDS ON
TRAINING IN JOB SKILLS THAT
COMPANIES LIKE IBM SAY THEIR
ENTRY LEVEL EMPLOYEES OFTEN
LACK.
>> YOU GET THOSE PEOPLE TO
HAVE THE PROBLEM-SOLVING
SKILLS AND THE TECHNICAL
SKILLS AND THE WRITING
SKILLS, AND PRESENTATION
SKILLS.
WE DON'T DO SOMETHING
DIFFERENT ABOUT TRANSFORMING
HIGH SCHOOL IN AMERICA,
WE'RE GOING TO BE IN BIG
TROUBLE.
THE U.S. IS NOT GOING TO BE
COMPETITIVE.
>> Srennivasan: SCHOOLS LIKE
P-TECH WHICH HAS ONLY BEEN
ADMITTING STUDENTS FOR THREE
YEARS ARE ATTRACTING MORE
ATTENTION AND LAST YEAR
RECEIVED AN ENDORSEMENT FROM
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA.
>> WHAT IS GOING ON HERE AT
P-TECH IS OUTSTANDING.
AND I'M EXCITED TO SEE IT
FOR MYSELF.
>> Srennivasan: AFTER THE
PRESIDENT VISITED P-TECH
LAST OCTOBER, HE ANNOUNCED A
$100 MILLION COMPETITIVE
GRANT PROGRAM, ENCOURAGING
SIMILAR PARTNERSHIPS BETWEEN
HIGH SCHOOLS, PRIVATE
INDUSTRY AND UNIVERSITIES.
16 FLU P-TECH SCHOOLS WILL
OPEN ACROSS NEW YORK IN
SEPTEMBER.
AND LEVERAGE THE SUPPORT OF
OTHER BUSINESSES TO FOCUS ON
AREAS INCLUDING
MANUFACTURING, CLEAN
TECHNOLOGY, AND HEALTH CARE.
MORE THAN 1500 STUDENTS
APPLIED TO BROOKLYN'S P-TECH
LAST FALL BUT THE SCHOOL WAS
ONLY ABLE TO ADMIT 144 9th
GRADERS.
>> THE KIDS ARE THE EVERY
DAY AVERAGE NEW YORK CITY
STUDENT, WE'RE JUST GIVING
THEM A DIFFERENT
OPPORTUNITY.
>> RASHID DAVIS IS P-TECH'S
FOUNDING PRINCIPAL.
DAVIS SAYS HIS STUDENTS ARE
CHOSEN ENTIRELY BY LOTTERY
AND COME FROM ALL FIVE
BOROUGHS OF FWHORK.
THE SCHOOL HE SAYS WAS
STARTED WITH ONE GOAL IN
MIND.
>> IT'S HOW DO YOU MAKE SURE
THAT WE CAN DIVERT THE
WORKFORCE WITH STUDENTS WHO
ARE NOT GENERALLY ON A PATH
TO THINK OF THEMSELVES AS
EITHER COLLEGE OR CAREER
READY.
AND SO THERE IS NO ACADEMIC
SCREENING.
THERE ARE NO TYPE OF TESTS
FOR ADMISSIONS.
THE IDEA, IF YOU ARE
INTERESTED, WE WILL HELP
MAKE YOU ACADEMICALLY STRONG
AND PREPARED SO THAT WAY YOU
CAN HAVE THAT PATHWAY FROM
HIGH SCHOOL TO COLLEGE TO
INDUSTRY.
>> Srennivasan: IBM
INITIALLY INVESTED $500,000
TO GET P-TECH OFF THE
GROUND.
MONEY SPENT TO DEVELOP THE
CURRICULUM AND PROVIDE
TEACHER TRAINING.
BUT FROM NOW ON, ALL IBM IS
INVESTING IS OUR TIME AND
TALENT.
>> Srennivasan: AND WHEN IT
COMES TO PAYING FOR THE
ADDITIONAL TWO YEARS BUILT
NOT MODEL, THE STATE OF NEW
YORK PICKS UP THAT TAB.
THE FIRST P-TECH IS LOCATED
IN A RUNDOWN SECTION OF
BROOKLYN'S CROWN HEIGHTS
NEIGHBORHOOD, SURROUNDED BY
LONCOUSING.
IT WAS CREATED AS PART OF A
FEDERAL TURNAROUND
INITIATIVE THAT IS ALSO
PHASING OUT OF POOR
PERFORMING HIGH SCHOOL IN
THE SAME BUILDING.
PRINCIPAL DAVIS CALLED THE
TWO YEARS OF FREE COLLEGE
TUITION A GAME CHANGER FOR
HIS STUDENTS.
>> ONCE YOU HAVE THE TWO
YEARS UNDER YOUR BELT, YOU
HAVE A BETTER FOUNDATION TO
COMPLETE THE FOUR YEAR
DEGREE.
AND SO THIS BECOMES VERY,
VERY IMPORTANT.
SO THAT FREE DEGREE CAN BE A
GREAT SENSE OF ADMIRATION
FOR FAMILIES.
>> P-TECH STUDENTS TAKE SOME
OF THEIR COURSES ON THE
CAMPUS OF NEW YORK CITY OF
TECHNOLOGY, PART OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK.
BUT THEY'RE ALSO EASED INTO
THE RIGOR BY HAVING
PROFESSORS TEACH AT THE HIGH
SCHOOL.
>> WHAT ELSE?
>> BONNIE AUGUST IS THE
PROBE HOST OF CITY TECH
STUNTED THAT THE DESIGN IS
WORK DESPITE THE FACT THAT
IT IS NEW AND RELATIVELY
UNTESTED.
>> I PERSONALLY AM WAITING
UNTIL WE'VE GRADUATED NOT
JUST ONE GROUP OF STUDENTS
BUT SEVERAL GROUPS OF
STUDENTS.
THESE ARE NOT EASY PROGRAMS.
THEY'RE VERY CHALLENGING
PROGRAMS.
>> Srennivasan: IBM SEES THE
ASSOCIATES DEGREE AS A GOOD
STARTING POINT BUT THEY
BELIEVE NOR SUPPORT IS
NEEDED FOR STUDENTS TO LEARN
ABOUT THE WORLD OF WORK SO
THEY OFFER INTERNSHIPS AND
PROVIDE MENTORS FOR EVERY
P-TECH STUDENT.
A PRODUCT LINE MANAGER FOR
THE COMPANY WAS PAIRED WITH
SIERRA COPELAND THREE YEARS
AGO.
MOST OF THEIR INTERACTIONS
ARE DONE ON-LINE AND BENITA
SAYS SHE WAS INITIALLY
SURPRISED BY THE QUESTIONS
SHE RECEIVED FROM SIERRA.
>> WHAT ARE MY INTERESTS,
WHAT KIND OF BOOK DOES I
READ.
WHAT DO I DO WHEN I'M A
LITTLE FRUSTRATED AT WORK.
DON'T YOU HAVE ISSUES AT
WORK, HOW DO YOU MANAGE.
I HAVE SEEN HER GROW AND BE
VERY MATURE IN HER
CONVERSATIONS WITH ME.
>> SIERRA WHOSE FOCUSING ON
ELECTROMECHANICAL
ENGINEERING SAYS THAT SHE
ALONG WITH PTECH HAVE OPEN
ODD HER EYES TO THE
OPPORTUNITY IN A CAREER AND
FIELDS DOMINATED BY MEN FOR
YEARS.
>> I CAN MAKE SOMETHING OUT
OF MYSELF WITH THIS DEGREE
SO I'M NOT JUST ANOTHER
STEREOTYPE.
BECAUSE THAT IS A STEREOTYPE
THAT ALL WOMEN COOK AND THEY
DON'T BUILD AND THEY DON'T
WIRE AND THEY DON'T PROGRAM.
>> Srennivasan: IBM STANLEY
LITTOUT STOPPED SHORT OF
PROMISING JOBS TO PTECH
STUDENTS ONCE THEY GRADUATE
BUT DE SAY THEY WILL HAVE
THE SKILLS THE COMPANY IS
LOOKING FOR TO FILL ENTRY
LEVEL POSITION THAT INCLUDE
SOFTWARE SPECIALISTS AND
TECH SUPPORT
REPRESENTATIVES.
>> OVER THE NEXT TEN YEARS
THERE ARE GOING TO BE 14
MILLION NEW JOBS CREATED FOR
STUDENTS WITH THOSE KINDS OF
CREDENTIALS AND THOSE KIND
OF SKILLS.
IF THROUGH A PTECH PROGRAM
THAT WE ARE INVOLVED IN THEY
WILL BE FIRST IN LINE FOR
JOBS AT IBM.
>> CLITIS WANTS TO ATTEND
MIS AFTER HE GRADUATES THEN
HOPEFULLY MEDICAL SCHOOL
WHICH WOULD PLEASE HIS
MOTHER.
>> EDUCATION IS VERY
IMPORTANT TO ME BECAUSE I --
GET THAT OPPORTUNITY.
>> SHE MOVED THE FAMILY FROM
GHANA TO NEW YORK.
SO HER CHILDREN COULD GET A
BETTER EDUCATION.
WHEN HER SON GOT INTO
PTECH -- P-TECH SHE WAS
THRILLED THE SCHOOL OFFERED
FREE COLLEGE CREDIT.
>> I WANT HIM TO BE SOME
BETTER PERSON, LIKE MAYBE A
DOCTOR.
>> Srennivasan: BUT IF THAT
DOESN'T WORK OUT, HE ALREADY
HAS A PLAN B.
>> I WILL ALWAYS HAVE THAT
ASSOCIATE DEGREE SO I CAN GO
INTO THE TECHNOLOGY FIELD,
GET A BACHELORS OR MASTERS
AND JUST KEEP GOING.
>> THERE ARE TWO SPECIFIC
ASSOCIATE DEGREES.
>> Srennivasan: EDUCATORS
FROM ACROSS THE GLOBE ARE
REGULARLY VISITING PIRX-TECH
TO SEE IF LESSONS LEARNED
HERE CAN BE REPLICATED.
>> YOU CAN FOLLOW OUR
AMERICAN GRADUATE REPORTING
TEAM ON TWITTER WHERE SHE
SHARED MORE TELEVISION ON
P-TECH.
WE ROUNDED UP THOSE
RESOURCES AND YOU CAN FIND
THEM ON THE RUNDOWN.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT TODAY RELEASED A
SCATHING REPORT FINDING WHAT IT
CALLS A PATTEF
FORCE" IN THE ALBUQUERQUE, NEW
MEXICO, POLICE DEPARTMENT.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS THAT STORY.
>> Brown: THE REPORT CITES
INCIDENTS DATING BACK TO 2010:
37 PEOPLE SHOT BY POLICE, 23 OF
THEM FATALLY.
THE MOST RECENT OCCURRED JUST
LAST MONTH AND WAS CAUGHT ON
VIDEOTAPE: THE FATAL SHOOTING
OF JAMES BOYD, A 38-YEAR-OLD
HOMELESS MAN WITH A HISTORY
OF MENTAL ILLNESS.
THAT LED TO A VIOLENT STREET
PROTEST AGAINST ALLEGED POLICE
BRUTALITY.
GENE GRANT, HOST OF "NEW MEXICO
IN FOCUS" ON NEW MEXICO PUBLIC
TELEVISION, HAS BEEN COVERING
THIS STORY AND JOINS US TONIGHT
FROM ALBUQUERQUE.
WELL, GENE, THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT RN
OF EXCESSIVE FORCE, SO
THEY'RE SEEING SOMETHING
THAT LINKS ALL THESE
SHOOTING, RIGHT?
EXPLAIN THAT.
>> YOU FOR EXAMPLE IT'S
INTERESTING, AS YOU
MENTIONED THERE WERE 37
INCIDENTS, 27 OF THEM FATAL
AND WHAT THEY WERE LOOKING
FOR QUITE SPECIFICALLYLY F
THERE WAS AN
UNCONSTITUTIONAL PATTERN OF
FOURTH AMENDMENT RIGHTS
BEING VIOLATED HERE.
AND THEY WERE QUITE STRONG
IN THEIR OPENING STATEMENT
RIGHT OFF THE BAT OF THE
HEARING THIS MORNING, THAT
IN FACT THEY'RE FINDINGS DID
FIND IN FACT THAT THE
ALBUQUERQUE POLICE
DEPARTMENT HAD A NUMBER OF
SITUATIONS THAT THEY FOUND
UNCONSTITUTIONAL AND DID
VIOLATE THOSE RIGHTS.
WHAT THAT ACTUALLY DID WAS
OPENED UP A LOT OF DIALOGUE
ABOUT WHAT IS GOING ON HERE.
WHAT IS THE PATTERN.
AND THE BIG PROBLEM OUT HERE
FOR US WITH THIS SITUATION
IS FOLKS WHO ARE MENTALLY
ILL OR IN SOME CRISIS OF
SOME SORT.
AND WHAT THE DOJ FOUND WAS
ESPECIALLY IN THOSE CASES
APD IS COMING UP SHORT.
THERE IS EXCESSIVE USE OF
FORCE, SOMETIMES DEADLY, BUT
THEY MENTIONED ALSO USING
TASERS, THEY WERE NOT
PLEASED WITH THAT PARBTED OF
IT AS WELL, AS PART OF A PAT
PERSON.
NOT JUST DEADLY FORCE YOU GO
EXCESSIVE FORCE WAS VERY
MUCH PART OF THE SITUATION.
THEY LAID OUT A WHOLE
CRITERIA OF CHANGES THEY
WOULD LIKE TO SEE.
THEY MADE IT QUITE CLEAR
THEY INTEND TO STAY AROUND
THE DOJ FOR A BIT AND WORK
WITH APD AND THE CITY OF
ALBUQUERQUE AND MAYOR
RICHARD BERRY ON SOME OF
THOSE REFORMS.
HOWEVER, WHAT WE DON'T HAVE
AT THIS POINT AND IS
APPARENTLY BEING DISCUSSED
TONIGHT BETWEEN DOJ AND THE
ADMINISTRATION AND THE
ALBUQUERQUE POLICE
DEPARTMENT IS TAKING IT TO
THAT NEXT STEP WHERE THE
POSSIBLE CONSENT DEGREE OR A
POSSIBLE FEDERAL MONITOR
THAT WILL BE ON HAND FOR A
PERIOD OF TIME.
NOW AS WE KNOW FROM OTHER
CITIES WHERE THIS IS-- SORRY
GO AHEAD.
>> I WAS GOING TO SAY JUST
TO STEP BACK HERE FIRST,
BECAUSE THIS HAS BEEN
BUILDING OVER A NUMBER OF
YEARS.
WHAT'S BEEN THE POLICE
REACTION ALONG THE WAY?
AND WHERE ARE THEY NOW?
>> THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
YOU KNOW, IT'S INTERESTING.
WE HAVE A NEW CHIEF, CHIEF
GORDON EDDEN HE CAME TO
REPLACE RAY SCHULTZ WHERE A
LOT OF THESE SHOOTINGS
HAPPENED UNDER HIS WATCH,
RAY SCHULTZ.
IN THAT TIME, WHAT HAPPENED
WAS THE USE OF LAPEL CAMERAS
BECAME PART OF THE REFORM A
YEAR AND A HALFING TWO, TWO
YEARS AGO.
AND THAT IS WHAT HAPPENED IN
THIS JAMES BOYD CASE, YOU
KNOW, IT WENT GLOBAL.
THE VIDEO TOOK IT TO A WHOLE
NEW LEVEL.
THE REACTION FROM THE POLICE
HAS BEEN FAIRLY MUTED SO FAR
BUT UNTIL THIS POINT TODAY
IT'S BEEN A BIT OF A
CIRCLING OF THE WAGONS.
A BIT 6 EVERYTHING IS OKAY
HERE, GOING BACK A YEAR AND
A HALF, TWO YEARS AGO OR SO.
I THINK THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT NOW JUST
BASICALLY HAS ITS HANDS
TIED.
THEY KNOW THE COMMUNITY IS
TO THE GOING TO ACCEPT THE
STATUS QUO ANY MORE.
WE'VE HAD THREE PROTEST
MARCHES, ONE OF WHICH MADE
THE NEWS GLOBALLY.
I WENT TO THE FIRST MARCH,
THE PEACEFUL MARCH LAST
TUESDAY, AN ENORMOUS MARCH
BY ALBUQUERQUE STANDARDS,
PEOPLE HAVE PRETTY MUCH HAD
IT.
SO FOR THE POLICE DEPARTMENT
IT'S A DIFFICULTY.
THEY REALLY DON'T HAVE
ANYTHING LEFT TO SAY NOW
THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE HAS HAD ITS SAY ON
CONSTITUTIONALITY OF THESE
ISSUES.
>> WELL, WHEN I INTERRUPTED
YOU EARLIER YOU WERE
STARTING TO TALK A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS NEXT.
BECAUSE THAT IS, OF COURSE,
THE E QUESTION AS YOU SAID,
S IT, THIS
HAS LEAD TIE FEDERAL
OVERSIGHT.
THAT'S ONE POSSIBILITY HERE.
WHAT IS ON THE TABLE?
>> YOU KNOW, IT'S
INTERESTING TO TRY TO FIGURE
OUT WHAT IS ON THE TABLE
BECAUSE THE MAYOR CAME OUT
ABOUT NOON TODAY, MAYOR
RICHARD PER AND SAID WE HAVE
A LOT OF WORK TO DO.
HOWEVER HE ALSO SAID THREE
WEEKS AGO THAT HE WOULD
PREFER AND ASK FOR A FEDERAL
MONITOR FOR THE SITUATION.
HE ACTUALLY CAME WITHOUT
BEING PRESSURED TO DO SO.
SO WHAT DOES THAT MEAN IN
THESE NEGOTIATIONS WITH ITS
DOJ.
WE DON'T KNOW, IS IT GOING
TO BE SOMETHING IN BETWEEN.
THE BIG QUESTION IS WHAT
WILL THE COMMUNITY ACCEPT,
JEFFREY.
YOU KNOW FOR A LOT OF FOLKS
HERE THERE IS GOING TO BE
NOTHING LEFT THAN A COMPLETE
TAKEOVER, WHICH NOBODY
THINKS IS GOING TO HAPPEN.
IT WON'T BE ENOUGH.
BUT SOMETHING HAS TO HAPPEN
WHERE FOLKS FEEL LIKE THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT IS NOT
CORRECTING ITSELF.
WE'VE BEEN THROUGH THAT FOR
20 YEARS NOW AND NOW IT'S
TIME FOR SOMETHING ELSE.
AND THAT IS WHAT DOJ IS IN
ESSENCE SAYING.
IT'S TIME TO TURN THE PAGE
AND TRY ANOTHER WAY.
>> HOW BIG A DEAL WHEN YOU
REFER TO THE COMMUNITY, WE
SAW SOME OF THESE PROTESTS,
SOME OF THEM TURNED VIOLENT,
ESPECIALLY AFTER JAMES BOYD
WAS SHOT.
HOW BIG A DEAL IS IT?
HOW MUCH HAS IT REALLY
GALVANIZED THE PUBLIC THERE?
>> YOU KNOWS WHAT'S
INTERESTING, ITS A AS BIG A
DEAL AS I CAN REMEMBER FOR
ANYTHING HERE.
I HAVE LIVED HERE FOREGO 27
YEARS.
AND IT REALLY, WHEN I WENT
TO THE PROTEST ON TUESDAY
THE CROSS-SECTION OF
ALBUQUERQUE WAS STARTLING.
THIS WAS NOT, YOU KNOW, A A
YOUNG LEFTIE CROWD OUT THERE
TO CAUSE TROUBLE.
THESE WERE SINGLE WOMEN,
FAMILIES, STROLLERS, ELDERLY
A LOT OF ELDERS.
AND THEY WERE JUST VERY UP
SET WITH THE WHOLE SITUATION
JUST SAYING LOOK, ENOUGH IS
ENOUGH.
THIS IS GOING TO BE STOP IT
IS AN ENORMOUS THING.
IT'S SOME NATURING THE NEWS
HERE, DOMINATING THE BLOC
BLOG, CERTAINLY DOMINATING
TALK RADIO AND TALKS, YOU GO
AROUND TOWN, EVERYBODY HAS
AN OPINION.
IT'S AMAZING ITS
CROSS-SECTION BY THE WAY OF
PEOPLE NOT PLEASED WITH APD
RIGHT NOW.
A LOT OF FOLKS WHO WOULD BE
NATURALLY INCLINED TO
SUPPORTED POLICE DEPARTMENT
ARE NOW SAYING WAIT A MINUTE,
WE GOT A PROBLEM HERE.
YOU CAN'T HAVE 23 DEATHS,
YOU KNOW, AND MOST OF THEM A
LOT OF THEM MENTALLY ILL AND
NOT HAVE A PROBLEM.
SO EVERYONE IS LOOKING FOR A
SOLUTION HERE.
IT'S AN EOM DEVELOPMENT
ISSUE, IT'S A QUALITY OF
LIFE SHOX IT'S A CIVIL
LIBERTIES ISSUE, IT CUTS
ACROSS ALL CONSTITUENCIES.
>> Brown: GENE GRANT, THANKS
A LOT.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE OTHER MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
SECRETARY KATHLEEN SEBELIUS IS
RESIGNING.
WALL STREET HAD A ROUGH RIDE,
MATT OBAMA WILL NO NATURE
CILIA BURR WELL DIRECTOR OF
THE OFFICE AND MAGAZINE TO
REPLACE HER.
AND WALL STREET HAD A ROUGH
RIDE, AS SELLING DROVE DOWN ALL
THE MAJOR INDEXES.
THE NASDAQ FELL 3% FOR ITS WORST
DAY SINCE 2011.
THE DOW INDUSTRIALS LOST MORE
THAN 260.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
ONLINE RIGHT NOW, 75 YEARS AGO
TODAY, ONE OF THE MOST
INFLUENTIAL BOOKS IN THE HISTORY
OF MEDICINE CHANGED THE LIVES
OF PEOPLE STRUGGLING WITH
ADDICTION.
"ALCOHOLICS ANONYMOUS"
INTRODUCED AMERICANS TO THE
FAMOUS 12 STEPS AND TO PERSONAL
STORIES DESIGNED TO GIVE
STRENGTH TO MILLIONS SEEKING
RECOVERY.
MEDICAL HISTORIAN DR. HOWARD
MARKEL RECOUNTS THE INSPIRATION
BEHIND THE BOOK ON OUR "HEALTH"
PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
>> Ifill: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
ROLE OF WORDS IN THE CIVIL
RIGHTS MOVEMENT-- JEFF BROWN AND
POET LAUREATE NATASHA TRETHEWEY
TRAVEL TO MISSISSIPPI AND
ALABAMA AS THEY EXPLORE
"WHERE POETRY LIVES."
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS
AMONG OTHERS.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE
PBS NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.